 
 USC VITERBI SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING  
 
DSCI  550: Data Science at Scale  
Spring  2024 (4 units ), 5:00 – 6:50 PM, TTh .  
Class location: MHP 101 
 
 Syllabus  
 
Instructor: Dr. Seon Ho Kim    Course Producer : TBD  
Email: seonkim@usc.edu      
Office: PHE33 4      
Phone: 213.871.0876         
 
Instructor ’s Office Hours:  
Mon day 3:00 pm  to 5:00 pm at PHE334 . Online connection using Zoom  
(https://usc.zoom.us/j/92999133208?pwd=aGRLdFNOdWxSeWV6SHhmYzJYRm8vQT09  ) will 
be also available during the office hour. Other hours by appointment only. Students are advised to 
make appointments with the professor ahead of time in any event and be specific with the subject 
matter to be discussed. Students should also be prepared for their appointment by bringing all 
applicable materials and information.  
 
Course Description:  
This course is designed as an overview course to give non-engineering background  students a 
broad understanding of data science  topics for big data and to get practical experience with key 
big data informa tics techniques. Topics include roadmap of informatics, the data lifecycle, the 
role of the data scientist, brief introduction to machine learning and data mining, analyzing and 
exploring big data with real world use cases , introduction to big data management eco system , 
and data visualization . Homework assignments and projects will give students practical 
experience with important topics covered in the course.  This class will be primarily individual 
and/or team study, wit h assigned readings, homework /projects  assignments, a midterm exam , and 
a final.  
Recommended Preparation:  
A basic understanding of engineering pri nciples and programming language is desirable . 
Books and Readings:  
No textbook but reading materials will be provided.  
 
Lecture notes  will be available in the Class Blackboard.  
 
Grading:  
Exams: 50% (midterm  20%, Final 30%), Homework  20%, Project: 25%, Attendance 5%   
# Any l ate submission  will be penalized, 30% per day.  
* The instructor reserves the right to make changes to the grading criteria, assignments 
and course outline to best serve the needs of the class.   
 Course Schedule  (Tentative)  
 
Week  Topic  Readings  
1 Class Introduction  
Introduction to Data 
Informatics  Lecture Note  
2 Overview of Big Data  
Basic Background  
(stat, programming)  Lecture Note  
3 Basic Background  
(stat, programming)  Lecture Note  
4 Machine Learning 1 
Class Project Discussion  Lecture Note  
5 Machine Learning 1 Lecture Note  
 
6  
 Machine Learning 2  
 Lecture Note  
7 Data Mining 1  
 Lecture Note  
8 Midterm  
Data Mining 2  2/27 In-person ex am  
Lecture Note  
9 Project Progress Review   
 
10 
  Spring Recess  
11 
 Introduction to Hadoop 
Ecosystem  Lecture Note  
12 
 Introduction to Hadoop 
Ecosystem  Lecture Note  
13  
NoSQL   
Lecture Note  
14 
 HBase  Lecture Note  
 
15 Introduction to Data 
Visualization  Lecture Note  
16 
 Final Exam Review  
Final Project Review   
 Final Exam   TBD  
 
Note:  
1. In your HW, exam, project, and email, please use only the name registered in USC 
roster system!  
2. No live lecture will be recorded so your attendance is important!  
Students with Disabilities:  
Any student requesting academic accommodations based on a disability is required to register 
with Disability Services and Programs (DSP) each semester. A letter of verification for approved  
 accommodations can be obtained from DSP. Please be sure the letter is delivered to me as early in 
the semester as possible. Your letter must be specific as to the nature of any accommodations 
granted. DSP is located in STU 301 and is open 8:30 am to 5:30 pm, Monday through Friday. 
The telephone number for DSP is (213) 740 -0776.  
 
Academic Integrity:  
USC seeks to maintain an optimal learning environment. General principles of academic honesty 
include the concept of respect for the intellectual property of others, the expectation that 
individual work will be submitted unless otherwise allowed by an instructor, and the obligations 
both to protect one’s own academic work from misuse by others as well as to avoid using 
another’s work as one’s own. All students are expected to understand and abide by these 
principles. SCampus, the Student Guidebook, ( www.usc.edu/scampus or http://scampus.usc.edu ) 
contains the University Student Conduct Code (see University Governance, Section 11.00), while 
the recommended sanctions are located in Appendix A.  
The University, as an instrument of learning, is predicated on the existence of an environment of 
integrity. As members of the academic community, faculty, students, and administrative officials 
share the responsibility for maintaining this environment. Faculties have the primary 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining an atmosphere and attitude of academic integrity 
such that the enterprise may flourish in an open and honest way. Students share this responsibility 
for maintaining standards of academic performance and classroom behavior conducive to the 
learning process. Administrative officials are responsible for the establishment and maintenance 
of procedures to support and enforce those academic standards. Thus, the entire University 
community bears the responsibility for maintaining an environment of integrity and for taking 
appropriate action to sanction individuals involved in any violation. When there is a clear 
indication that such individuals are unwilling or unable to support these standards, they should 
not be allowed to remain in the University.” 
(http://policies.usc.edu/p4acad_stud/facultyhandbook.pdf)  
Academic dishonesty includes: (http://policies.usc.edu/p4acad_stud/facultyhandbook.pdf)  
• Examination behavior – any use of external assistance during an examination shall be 
considered academically dishonest unless expressly permitted by the teacher.  
• Fabrication – any intentional falsification or invention of data or citation in an academic 
exercise will be considered a violation of academic integrity.  
• Plagiarism – the appropriation and subsequent passing off of another’s ideas or words as 
one’s own. If the words or ideas of another are used, acknowledgment of the original 
source must be made through recognized referencing practices.  
• Other Types of Academic Dishonesty – submitting a paper written by or obtained from 
another, using a paper or essay in more than one class without the teacher’s  express 
permission, obtaining a copy of an examination in advance without the knowledge and 
consent of the teacher, changing academic records outside of normal procedures and/or 
petitions, using another person to complete homework assignments or take -home exams 
without the knowledge or consent of the teacher.  
The use of unauthorized material, communication with fellow students for course assignments, or 
during a mid -term examination, attempting to benefit from work of another student, past or  
 present and similar behavior that defeats the intent of an assignment or mid -term examination, is 
unacceptable to the University. It is often difficult to distinguish between a culpable act and 
inadvertent behavior resulting from the nervous tensions accompanying examinations. Where a 
clear violation has occurred, however, the instructor may disqualify the student’s work as 
unacceptable and assign a failing mark on the paper.  
 
Return of Course Assignments:  
Returned paperwork, unclaimed by a student, will be discarded after a year and hence, will not be 
available should a grade appeal be pursued following receipt of his/her grade.  
Emergency Preparedness/Course Continuity in a Crisis:  
In case of a declared emergency if travel to campus is not feasible, USC executive leadership will 
announce an electronic way for instructors to teach students in their residence halls or homes 
using a combination of Blackboard, teleconferencing, and other technologies.  
 