Unifying Big Data and AI  A Guide to  
Data Science at Scale   2Trends driving innovation in big data  
and AI, the challenges this creates  for enterprises, and insights on how  
to overcome these obstacles with a  
unified approach to analytics.
PRODUCT RECOMMENDATIONS CUSTOMER LOYAL TY SMART LOGISTICS NEW PRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT3Introduction
The world has come a long way since the early days of data analysis where a simple relational database, point 
in time data, and some internal spreadsheet expertise helped to drive business decisions. Today, the challenges 
related to data analysis as a driver of innovation are far more complex and yet very exciting.
Beyond simple decision support, a modern scalable analytics platform is capable of driving monumental 
change in an organization. Advancements in AI and machine learning have enabled early adopters of big data 
to unlock new business models, grow revenue streams and deepen customer relationships.
Product Recommendations
Use rich customer profiles and machine learning to 
recommend next best offers and products to drive 
higher customer conversion.
Customer LoyaltyHolistically understand the factors that impact  
loyalty — such as quality of service, pricing and product 
features — to improve the customer experience and 
reduce churn.New Product DevelopmentAggregate customer, market trend, social media 
and other sources of data to identify new product 
innovations and reduce time to market.Smart Logistics
Analyze mountains of transactions and sensor data to improve supply chain management and 
operational efficiency across warehouses, stores  
and fleets.Leading companies across industries are using big data and AI to drive  
a broad range of innovative use cases:
While the promise of big data and AI has never been more achievable, taking this dream and putting it into 
practice has never been more challenging. The success of your analytics projects hinges on knowing the 
challenges that lay ahead, avoiding common pitfalls and choosing the right technologies that can scale with 
your business.4The Challenges
There are six primary obstacles limiting the ability of companies to adopt 
and scale analytics and AI.
Data Growth
Data, and how it is put to use, are key to any business success. At issue is that data volumes are increasing in 
an almost vertical trajectory, are becoming highly distributed, and can come in a variety of formats. According 
to IDC, global data generation will reach 180 zettabytes by 2025 — up from close to 10 zettabytes today.1 
Capitalizing on the promise of big data to fuel the next phase of innovation is an incredible challenge for any organization. Exploring data at scale and building models in real-time requires on-demand compute power and 
elastic infrastructure that is built for big data.
Infrastructure Complexity
The move to the cloud is fast becoming a primary objective for businesses looking to reduce costs and scale their analytics. Part of the challenge associated with this inexorable shift is the complexity that surrounds 
setting up and maintaining a big data infrastructure. This creates challenges for both DevOps and data 
scientists alike. Data infrastructure teams are tasked with connecting and managing patchwork cloud 
technologies while data scientists are left trying to figure out how to spin up resources and access their data 
across hard to navigate cloud tools.
22005.1 ZB1.2 ZB2.8 ZB8.5 ZB
20102012
201544 ZB
2020
1 Press, Gil (2017, January 20). 6 Predictions For The $203 Billion Big Data Analytics Market. Retrieved from http://forbes.com
2 Logicworks (2016, September 1). Why Vendor Lock-in Remains a Big Roadblock to Cloud Success. Retrieved from http://cloudcomputing-news.net
3 The Cloud Hangover. Retrieved from http://sungardas.com 5Disparate Technologies
Companies are trying to use a myriad of technologies to achieve their goals of becoming a more data-
driven business. Open source projects such as Apache Spark™, Hive, Presto, Kafka, MapReduce, and Impala 
offer the promise of a competitive advantage, but also come with management complexity and unexpected 
costs.3
 Adding to the challenge is the need to provide analysts and data scientists with support for the scripting languages (e.g. R, Python, Scala, or SQL) they feel most comfortable using. Relying on disparate 
technologies to meet all these needs can be incredibly challenging as they all follow different release 
cycles, lack institutional support mechanisms, and have varying performance deliverables.66Disjointed Analytics Workflows
One impact of disparate technologies is that it throws workflows into disarray and creates  
bottlenecks that restrict efforts to move projects from raw data to final outcome. A lack of automation  
between the various steps of data ingestion, ETL, exploration, modeling and presentation of data create 
massive inefficiencies that can ripple through the organization.4 This greatly reduces the speed of innovation  
that is the promise of big data, data science, and a move to the cloud.
Siloed Teams
The productivity of the team structured across a data organization can be severely impacted without a seamless and dependable big data platform. It’s very difficult for the traditionally siloed functional roles 
of data scientist, data engineer, and business user to achieve any synergy and work together both within 
a function and across teams. Few analytics platforms truly promote a collaborative experience. It’s not 
uncommon for a data scientist to build and train a model in a vacuum on their local machine cut-off from their 
peers and data engineering. The lack of real-time feedback and collaborative capabilities can bring model 
development and deployment to a snail crawl.
Protecting the Data
Ironically, even if there is a successful implementation of fragmented technologies allowing organizations 
to leverage the value of their data, ensuring that the data itself is secure is called into question. Configuring 
individual technologies so that they comply with a cohesive security strategy can max out even the most 
seasoned security stakeholders. According to Gartner, 80 percent of organizations will fail to develop a 
consolidated data security policy across silos, leading to potential noncompliance, security breaches and 
financial liabilities.5 The increased number of endpoints that need to be secured in this splintered infrastructure 
makes protecting the most valuable asset of the business incredibly challenging. But if achieved, a secure 
foundation can provide the necessary assurances necessary to unlock the possibilities within the data.
4 MSV, Janakiram (2017, February 7). Edge Computing — Redefining The Enterprise Infrastructure. Retrieved from http://forbes.com
5 Gartner (2014, June 4). Gartner Says Big Data Needs a Data-Centric Security Focus. Retrieved from http://gartner.com780%
OF ORGANIZATIONS
will fail to develop a consolidated  
data security policy across silos
BUSINESS ANALYST DATA ENGINEER DATA SCIENTIST
Siloed teams using disparate 
technologies create management 
headaches and security concerns. 
8With so many data challenges facing enterprises that act as a brake on innovation, distracting the organization 
from their core competencies and slowing time to market for new products and insights, a new approach needs 
to be considered.
With data as the fuel for innovation, the modern era’s enterprise requires a comprehensive, unified approach 
to analytics. This approach should enable the goals of the organization to become an innovation hub, creating 
virtuous cycles where developers and data scientists can focus on the data and collaboration, rather than 
fighting disparate technologies, and working in silos.
 
Likewise, engineering teams should be freed from the mundane tasks of maintaining different open source projects. These projects may not work well with one another, introduce unnecessary security risks, lack 
enterprise support, and become outdated quickly. The engineering team should instead be able to focus on the 
important mission of ensuring optimal performance of the customer-facing applications that drive revenue for 
the business.
Databricks provides the ideal solution to these challenges by providing 
a platform that unifies data engineering, data science, and the business. 
Powered by Apache Spark, the Databricks Unified Analytics Platform 
empowers teams to be truly data-driven to accelerate innovation and deliver transformative business outcomes.The Need for a Unified Approach
Databricks lets us focus on business problems and makes certain processes very simple. Now it’s a 
question of how do we bring these benefits to others in the organization who might not be aware of 
what they can do with this type of platform.
—   Dan Morris, Senior Director of Product Analytics, ”“
89DATA WAREHOU SES CLOUD STORAGE HADOOP STORA GE
 IoT / STREA MING DATARemoves Devops& 
Infrastructure Co mplexityAccelerates & Simplifies 
Data Prep for AnalyticsEliminates Disparate Tools 
with Optimized SparkIncrea ses Data Science 
Produ ctivity by 5x
DATABRICKS SERVE RLESS
DATABRICKS DELTA
Automated Performance Data ReliabilityDATABRICKS RUNTIME
Producti on Jobs Optimized IOExplore Data       T rain Models       Se rve ModelsDATABRICKS COLLABORATIVE WORKSPACE
DATABRICKS 
ENTERPRISE SECURITY + more
Open Extensible Platform
The Need for a Unified Approach
The Databricks Unified Analytics Platform10Unify Analytics with Apache Spark
To avoid the problems associated with siloed data and disparate systems handling different analytic 
processes, enterprises need Apache Spark. Spark is the de facto standard for big data processing and analytics 
that can handle any and all data sources, whether structured, unstructured, or streaming. Additionally, the 
unified system is agnostic to whether data is fed from the cloud or on-premises, enabling teams to extract 
valuable insights, and build performant models to fuel innovation.The Databricks Advantage:  
Apache Spark
•  Created at UC Berkeley in 2009 by Matei Zaharia
•  Replaced MapReduce as the de facto data processing engine for big data analytics
•  Includes libraries for SQL, streaming, machine learning and graph
•  Largest open source community in big data (1000+ contributors from 250+ orgs)
•  Trusted by some of the largest enterprises (Netflix, Yahoo, Facebook, eBay, Alibaba)
 •  Databricks contributes 75% of the code, 10x more than any other company
•  Over 365,000+ Meetup members around the world.The Rapid 
Ascension of Apache SparkETLSQL  
AnalyticsMachine  
LearningStreaming
Spark Core API
R SQL Python Scala JavaArchitecture11The Databricks Advantage:  
Simplified Infrastructure
Alleviate Infrastructure Complexity Headaches
Infrastructure teams can stop fighting complexity and start focusing on customer-facing applications by getting 
out of the business of maintaining complex data infrastructure. This is thanks to Databricks’ serverless, fully 
managed, and highly elastic cloud service. And because Databricks has the industry’s leading Spark experts, 
the service is cloud optimized to ensure ultra-reliable speed and reliability at scale.
Data scientists no longer have to wait for an 
infrastructure team to provision and configure 
hardware for them, but instead, can be up and 
running in minutes so they can focus on what’s 
really important — building models that drive 
innovation. With optimized, highly elastic Spark 
clusters at their fingertips, analysts and data scientists can now explore petabytes of data in 
real-time. 
•  Created at UC Berkeley in 2009 by Matei Zaharia
•  Replaced MapReduce as the de facto data processing engine for big data analytics
•  Includes libraries for SQL, streaming, machine learning and graph
•  Largest open source community in big data (1000+ contributors from 250+ orgs)
•  Trusted by some of the largest enterprises (Netflix, Yahoo, Facebook, eBay, Alibaba)
 •  Databricks contributes 75% of the code, 10x more than any other company
•  Over 365,000+ Meetup members around the world.Databricks takes the pain out of cluster management, and puts the real power of these systems in the 
hands of those who need it most: developers, analyst, and data scientists are now freed up to think 
about business and technical problems.
— Shaun Elliott, Technical Lead of Service Engineering, ”“
Launch scalable Spark clusters with a few clicks of a button
12
Work Better Together — Become a Heroic Team
With a unified approach to analytics, data science teams can collaborate using Databricks’ interactive 
workspace. They can use their preferred scripting languages (such as R, Python, Scala, and SQL) and 
libraries (such as scikit-learn, nltk ML, pandas, etc) to interact with data and build models in a shared 
notebook environment, and then seamlessly move those models to production with a single click. 
Collaborative workspaces allow teams to view and edit models in-flight and provide real-time feedback, 
helping to accelerate innovation.
Technology is nothing without people to make it great, and Databricks ensures a team can become heroes, 
by providing a common interface and tooling for all stakeholders, regardless of skill set, to collaborate with 
one another. This eliminates data silos and frees teammates to focus on what they do best, which in turn 
benefits their organization and increases innovation.
By integrating and streamlining the individual elements that comprise the analytics lifecycle, teams can 
now build models and test prototypes in hours, versus weeks or months with older approaches.The Databricks Advantage:  
Collaborative Workspaces
12
13
Deliver on the Promise of Big Data and AI 
It’s time to start delivering on all the analytics needs of the business. With Databricks, data scientists and 
analysts alike can explore data and seamlessly move across various types of analytics — including batch,  
ad hoc, machine learning, deep learning, stream processing, and graph — enabling them to meet the evolving 
needs of the business in one unified platform.
Powerful visualizations can be launched with a few clicks, including a wide range of general-purpose data 
visualizations (such as bar plots, maps, etc) in addition to visualizations designed for machine learning 
(such as MatPlotLib, GGPlot, etc) — a must for organizations serious about AI. Visualizations can be turned 
into interactive dashboards that are easily shared with decision makers across the business. Additionally, 
Databricks integrates with popular BI tools (including Looker, Tableau, Qlik and Alteryx) so existing investments 
can be fully leveraged.The Databricks Advantage:  
Unified Analytics
Build powerful visualizations and 
interactive dashboards 
14Streamline End-to-End Workflows
With Databricks, each team is empowered to focus on their core 
competencies in the same easy to use platform.
No matter the analytic workload, the engineering team can focus on 
data preparation and productionizing the models that the data scientists build through 
a common, unified framework. Data science teams leverage the same platform to explore and visualize data 
interactively, streamlining analytics workflows.
Building machine learning models is simple with collaborative notebooks that allow data scientists to 
work together to build and train machine learning models at scale. And interactive dashboards enable data 
practitioners to publish insights to business analysts and decision makers across the company. Getting from 
raw data to real business insight has never been easier.The Databricks Advantage:  
Consolidated Workflows
15Keep Data Safe and Secure
They say all press is good press, but a headline stating the company has lost 
valuable data is never good press. When a breach happens the enterprise 
grinds to a halt, and innovation and time-to-market is out the window. 
Databricks takes security very seriously, and by providing a common user 
interface as well as integrated technology set, data is protected at every level 
with a unified security model featuring fine grained controls, data encryption 
at rest and in motion, identity management, rigorous auditing, and support for 
compliance standards like HIPAA, SOC 2 Type II, and ISO 27001.The Databricks Advantage:  
Security & TCO
Lowering the Total Cost of Ownership
When adopting new technologies all vendors promise to lower total cost of ownership, but often these can be empty promises. Databricks stands behind the lowered TCO claim with a cloud-native unified platform that 
means no expensive hardware; an operationally simple platform designed to help you efficiently manage 
your costs; increased productivity through seamless collaboration; support for familiar languages like SQL, R, 
Python, and Scala; and faster performance than other analytics products — which allows you to process and 
analyze data, resulting in a shorter time to value.
” “
Databricks has allowed us to focus on data science rather than DevOps. It’s helped foster collaboration 
across our data science and analyst teams which has impacted innovation and productivity.  
— John Landry, Distinguished Technologist, 16A recognized leader in oil and gas 
exploration and production, Shell 
has operations around the globe. To 
maintain production, Shell stocks over 
3,000 spare parts across their facilities. 
It’s crucial the right parts are available 
at the right time to avoid outages, but 
equally important is not overstocking which can be cost-prohibitive.
Customer Story17The Challenges
• Disjointed Inventory Distribution: Stocking practices are often driven by a combination of vendor 
recommendations, prior operational experience and “gut feeling” .
• Limited Decision Support System Availability: There has been limited focus directed towards incorporating historical data and doing advanced analysis to come up with decisions.
• Lost Business Agility: This can lead to excessive or insufficient stock being held at Shell’s locations, like oil rigs which has significant business implications
The Solution
Databricks provides Shell with a cloud-native unified analytics platform that helps with improved inventory and supply chain management:
• Databricks Runtime: The team to dramatically improved the performance of the simulations.
• Interactive Workspace: The data science team is able to collaborate on the data and models via the 
interactive workspace.
• Cluster Management: Significant reduction in total cost of ownership by moving to the Databricks cloud solution and gains in operational efficiency.
• Automated Workflows: Using analytic workflow automation, Shell is easily able to build reliable and fast 
data pipelines that allow them to predictive when to purchase parts, how long to keep them, and where to 
place inventory items. 
Results
• Predictive Modeling: Scalable predictive model is developed and deployed across more than 3,000 types 
of materials at 50+ locations.
• Historical Analyses: Each material model involves simulating 10,000 Markov Chain Monte Carlo iterations to capture historical distribution of issues.
• Massive Performance Gains: With a focus on improving performance the data science team reduced the inventory analysis and prediction time to 45 minutes from 48 hours on a 50 node Spark cluster on 
Databricks — a 32X performance gain.
• Reduced Expenditures: Cost savings equivalent to millions of dollars per year.18Hotels.com is a premier website for 
booking accommodations online with 
85 websites in 34 languages, listing over 
325,000 hotels in approximately 19,000 
locations. Hotels.com required massive 
compute and analytics capabilities to 
ensure a targeted and satisfying customer 
experience when booking travel.Customer Story
Agility and flexibility were critical 
for us to successfully support our 
data science and engineering 
goals. Moving to Databricks’ Unified 
Analytics Platform to run 100% of our 
workflows has been a huge boost for 
our business and our customers.
—  Matt Fryer 
VP , Chief Data Science Officer 
Hotels.com ”“19The Challenges
• Leverage machine learning to drive consumer experience: Massive volume of image files for each 
property listing included duplicates and lacked organization for ranking and classification. Needed to build 
real-time scoring and become more efficient at deploying machine learning models into production.
• Increase customer conversions: Being able to understand customer trends in real-time to develop strategies to drive conversion and lifetime value.
• Build a more robust and faster data pipeline: On premise Hadoop cluster using SQL and SAS to do data science at scale was slow and limiting – taking 2 hours to process the data pipeline on only 10% of the data.
The Solution
Databricks has helped Hotels.com to realize its goal of becoming “data science focused” so that they can 
anticipate customer behavior and provide a more optimized user experience.
• Cluster Management: Able to scale volume of data significantly without adding infrastructure complexity.
• Interactive Workspace: Foster a culture of collaboration among data science teams within Hotels.com as 
well as other business units within Expedia.
• Databricks Runtime: Increase processing performance of streaming data even at scale. 
Results
• Accelerate ETL at scale: Able to increase the volume of data processed by 20x without impacting 
performance.
• Optimized user experience: Highly accurate and effective display of images within the context of property searches by customers.
• Increased sales efficiency: Providing the right hotel with the right images based on searches has resulted in higher conversions.
”The Bottom Line
The goal of Databricks’ Unified Analytics Platform is to accelerate innovation 
with scalable analytics and AI. It accomplishes this by uniting people around 
a shared objective with a common collaboration interface and self-service 
functionality. Additionally, Databricks unifies analytic workflows by seamlessly connecting operations and automating infrastructure — removing complexity for 
organizations and allowing them to innovate faster than ever before.
Get started on Databricks today with  
a free trial or personalized demo.
© Databricks 2018. All rights reserved. Apache, Apache Spark, Spark and the Spark logo are trademarks of the Apache Software Foundation.